Rewrite motivation and define differences between actors (#3)
Azoy/swift-evolution: proposals/nnnn-mutex.md

## Motivation

> In concurrent programs, protecting shared mutable state is one of the core fundamental problems to ensuring reading and writing data is done in an explainable fashion. Synchronizing access to shared mutable state is not a new problem in Swift however. We've introduced many features to help protect mutable data. Actors are a straightforward solution to protecting your mutable state because it isolates the stored data in its own domain. At any one time, only one execution context will have exclusive access to this data. Multiple contexts cannot race with each other and leave your storage in an inconsistent or broken state. The actor model guarantees that all mutable state stored within it is isolated (except `nonisolated` and `let` storage) and operations that access such data are coupled together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In concurrent programs, protecting shared mutable state is one of the core fundamental problems to ensuring reading and writing data is done in an explainable fashion. Synchronizing access to shared mutable state is not a new problem in Swift. We've introduced many features to help protect mutable data. Actors are a good default go-to solution for protecting mutable state because it isolates the stored data in its own domain. At any given point in time, only one task will be executing "on" the actor, and have exclusive access to it. Multiple tasks cannot access state protected by the actor at the same time, although they may interleave execution at potential suspension points (indicated by `await`). In general, the actor approach also leans itself well to code organization, since the actor's state, and operations on this state are logically declared in the same place: inside the actor.
```

> Ensuring your mutable state is properly synchronized in a coherent way may be as simple as changing your `class` type to an `actor`. However, there may be cases where it's not so simple to do so. For example, a historically synchronous code base may not be able to adopt features like `async`/`await` for any number of reasons, but couldn't embrace the actor model because of that restriction. Perhaps there is data that is allocated together, but isn't mutually exclusive with each other. Should you just allocate two actors?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensuring your mutable state is properly synchronized in a coherent way may be as simple as changing your `class` type to an `actor`. However, there may be cases where it's not so simple to do so. For example, a historically synchronous code base may not be able to adopt features like `async`/`await` for any number of reasons, and cannot embrace the actor model because of that restriction. Perhaps there is data that is allocated together, but isn't mutually exclusive with each other. Should you just allocate two actors?
```

This section reads a bit weird to be honest, I'd consider dropping it entirely And just say as intro to the below section that...

```suggestion
Not all code may be (or want to) able to adopt actors. Reasons for this can be very varied, for example code may have to execute synchronously without any potential for other tasks interleaving with it. Or the `async` effect introduced on methods may prevent legacy code which cannot use Swift Concurrency from interacting with the protected state.
```

WDYT?

Author: Sounds good to me!

> Whatever the reason may be, it may not be feasible to use an actor. In such cases, Swift doesn't really offer great solutions to help synchronize such access to mutable data. Many Swift programs opt to use ad-hoc implementations of a mutal exclusion lock, or a mutex. A mutex is a simple and easy to use synchronization primitive to help protect shared mutable data by ensuring that a single execution context has exclusive access to the related data. The main issue is that there isn't a single standardized implementation for this synchronization primitive resulting in everyone needing to roll their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whatever the reason may be, it may not be feasible to use an actor. In such cases, Swift currently is missing standardized tools to offer developers ensure proper synchronization in their concurrent data-structures. Many Swift programs opt to use ad-hoc implementations of a mutal exclusion lock, or a mutex. A mutex is a simple to use synchronization primitive to help protect shared mutable data by ensuring that a single execution context has exclusive access to the related data. The main issue is that there isn't a single standardized implementation for this synchronization primitive resulting in everyone needing to roll their own.
```

Driving more home that we're just not providing tools, rather than some great story about it. Plain wording is better here, doesn't sound like there's some amazing new invention coming up :)

* macOS, iOS, watchOS, tvOS, visionOS:
  * `os_unfair_lock`
* Linux:

>   * `futex`

Reviewer: <3

By marking the closure as such, we've effectively declared that the mutex is in itself its own isolation domain. We must not let non-sendable values it holds onto be unsafely sent across isolation domains to prevent these holes of shared mutable state.

### Differences between mutexes and actors

> The mutex type we're proposing is a synchronous lock. This means when other participants want to acquire the lock to access the protected shared data, they will hault execution until they are able to do so. Those that are waiting to acquire the lock will not be able to make forward progress until their request to acquire the lock has completed. This can lead to thread contention if the acquired thread's critical section is not able to be executed relatively quickly exhausting resources for the rest of the system to continue making forward progress. Traditional synchronous locks are also prone to deadlocks and livelocks which can leave a process in an unrecoverable state. These scenarios can occur when there is a complex hierarchery of different locks that manage to depend on the acquisition of each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mutex type we're proposing is a synchronous lock. This means when other participants want to acquire the lock to access the protected shared data, they will halt execution until they are able to do so. Threads that are waiting to acquire the lock will not be able to make forward progress until their request to acquire the lock has completed. This can lead to thread contention if the acquired thread's critical section is not able to be executed relatively quickly exhausting resources for the rest of the system to continue making forward progress. Synchronous locks are also prone to deadlocks (which Swift's actors cannot currently encounter due to their re-entrant nature) and live-locks which can leave a process in an unrecoverable state. These scenarios can occur when there is a complex hierarchy of different locks that manage to depend on the acquisition of each other.
```
